Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we are talking all about the science of gratitude.
In part, we're doing this
because of the upcoming Thanksgiving holiday,
which of course is all about giving thanks, gratitude,
but also because there's now a wealth of data
showing that having an effective gratitude practice
can impact a huge number of health variables,
both mental health and physical health in positive ways,
things like cardiovascular health,
things like relationships, things like mental health,
things like physical and cognitive performance,
and these are not small effects.
These are very large positive effects.
However, in researching this episode,
I was completely surprised as to what constitutes
an effective gratitude practice.
I, I think like many of you,
would have thought that an effective gratitude practice
simply involves writing down a few things
or many things that we're grateful for.
We're thinking about those,
or really making an effort to somaticize
or feel some of the elements of gratitude
while writing out that list or thinking about that list.
It turns out that an effective gratitude practice
doesn't resemble that at all.
The neuroimaging data, the physiological data,
looking at things like inflammatory markers,
other studies purely looking at the psychology
and the long and short-term effects of an effective
gratitude practice point to a completely different approach
to using gratitude to positively impact health metrics.
Fortunately, these are things that we can all do
very easily.
Some of them are actually fun.
You can do them in a variety of contexts.
So today we're going to talk about the science
of effective gratitude practices,
and we're going to describe what those are
and how you can incorporate them into your life.
Before we dive into today's topic,
I just want to highlight a particularly interesting set
of findings from the literature.
This is a study that came out in the journal Cell Report,
Cell Press Journal, excellent journal.
It's very relevant to today's topic.
In fact, we're going to spend more time with this paper
a little bit later in the episode.
The study involved having subjects listen to a story.
The subjects are all listening to the same story,
but those subjects are not listening to it together.
They're not rounded up in a circle or all in a room.
They're in separate rooms or entirely separate locations
on the planet, or they are actually brought
into the laboratory on separate days.
What this study found is that different subjects
listening to the same story
undergo the same variation in heart rate.
In other words, the gaps between their heartbeats
start to resemble one another
in response to the same story.
Now, this is very interesting.
This is a coordination of the physiology of the body
in response to a narrative, a story, in different people.
And yet when they line up the heart rates
of these different people who listen to the story
at completely different times,
they find that those heart rates map onto one another
almost identically.
It's really remarkable.
We're going to talk about what this means
in terms of coordination of neural circuits in the brain
and neural circuits in the body and the organs
such as the heart, but also the lungs
and other organs of the body,
and what this means for changing one's overall state.
A key thing that's going to come up today again and again
is the distinction between traits,
which are pervasive aspects of who we are
and how we tend to react to different types of circumstances
and states, which are more transient.
They tend to, you know, you can invoke a state in somebody,
a state of fear or a state of relaxation.
But what this study really starts to point to
is that there are specific approaches
that any of us can take
in order to really rewire our nervous system
such that we are calmer if we want to be calmer
in certain circumstances,
that we are more responsive in certain circumstances
if that's our goal.
So we'll return to how one would go about doing that.
I think these results are just beautiful
in the sense that they really show
that our brain and our body are highly coordinated
because people are listening to the story
and the heart rate is changing in response to the story,
but that there is a, what we call a stereotopy,
a sort of stereotyped response to a given story.
In my mind, there was no reason
why the results had to be this way.
You know, two people listen to the same story.
Why should their heart rates be almost identical
to the same story?
Very, very interesting and points
to the power of narrative and story
in coordinating our physiology.
And this is something powerful that we can leverage.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information about science
and science-related tools to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Roca.
Roca makes eyeglasses and sunglasses
that are of the absolute highest quality.
I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system,
and I can tell you that the visual system
has a number of important features
that allow you to see things with crystal clarity
no matter what environment you're in.
So that means if you're in bright sunlight
or you go into shadows,
you should be able to see everything clearly.
But many eyeglasses and sunglasses actually short circuit
that feature of our visual system
and make it such that we have to take off our glasses
or if our screen dims,
we feel like we can't see things quite right.
Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses
have completely solved that problem.
In addition, they're very lightweight,
so you don't even remember that they're on your face.
And if you get sweaty, they don't slip off.
They were actually designed for cycling and running
and things of that sort, but they have a terrific aesthetic.
So I wear readers at night or out to dinner
or when I'm driving, I wear their sunglasses.
And the aesthetics are really terrific
even though they're so-called performance glasses
because as many of you know,
performance glasses often make people look like cyborgs.
These sunglasses and eyeglasses
have the kind of aesthetic that you can wear them anywhere,
while cycling, running,
but also doing anything else you might be doing.
If you'd like to try Roca glasses,
you can go to roca.com, that's R-O-K-A.com
and enter the code Huberman
to save 20% off your first order.
Again, that's Roca, R-O-K-A.com
and enter the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's podcast is also brought to us by Inside Tracker.
Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better meet your immediate
and long-term health goals.
I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done
for the simple reason that many of the factors
that impact your immediate and long-term health
can only be analyzed from a quality blood test.
And now with the advent of modern DNA tests,
you can also get insights into your genes
and how those affect or should affect your immediate
and long-term health choices.
A big problem with a lot of blood tests
and DNA tests out there, however,
is that you get the data back
and you don't know what to do with the data.
Inside Tracker has solved that problem
with a very easy to use dashboard
where you get your numbers back from your blood tests,
your DNA tests, and then it points to specific
lifestyle factors, nutritional factors, and so forth
that can allow you to bring the numbers
into the ranges that are optimal for you.
This is a huge advantage over other blood tests
and DNA tests out there.
Another feature that Inside Tracker has
is their inner age test.
The inner age test shows you what your biological age is
and you can compare that to your chronological age.
And of course your biological age is equally,
if not more important than your chronological age.
So this is an important number
that you can get from Inside Tracker.
If you'd like to try Inside Tracker,
you can go to insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans.
And if you're listening to this
during the week of Thanksgiving, 2021,
and you live in the United States,
you can get a special offer for this week only.
You can get $200 off their ultimate package,
25% off any other package,
and you'll get the inner age test for free.
Again, just go to insidetracker.com slash Huberman.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Magic Spoon.
Magic Spoon is a zero sugar, grain-free,
keto-friendly cereal.
I'm not following a ketogenic nutrition plan.
What works best for me is to fast
until about 11 AM or noon most days,
and then to eat a low carbohydrate lunch,
a low carbohydrate snack in the afternoon,
and in the evening is when I eat my starches.
That's what allows me to be alert throughout the day
for work, for exercise, and so forth,
and then to sleep really well at night.
That's just what works for me,
but it does require that throughout the day,
I'm eating fewer carbohydrates than I am at night.
And oftentimes I want a snack,
and the snack I want is usually Magic Spoon.
Magic Spoon has zero grams of sugar,
13 to 14 grams of protein,
and only four net grams of carbohydrates in each serving.
It's absolutely delicious.
I particularly like the frosted flavor
because it tastes like donuts,
and then I try not to eat donuts.
No vendetta against donuts,
but it's not really compatible with my eating plan.
They also have flavors like cocoa, fruity, peanut butter.
They're really delicious.
Any ideas you have about keto-friendly cereals
and foods not being delicious,
you have to try Magic Spoon.
It'll change your mind.
In fact, I'm getting hungry just thinking about it right now.
If you want to try Magic Spoon,
you can go to magicspoon.com slash Huberman
to get a variety pack.
Just use the promo code Huberman at checkout
to get $5 off your order.
Again, that's magicspoon.com slash Huberman,
and use the code Huberman to get $5 off.
Let's talk about gratitude.
And to begin, I'd like to emphasize the various aspects
of mental and physical health that have been shown
to benefit from a regular gratitude practice.
There are studies showing that performing
a gratitude practice twice or three times
or even just once a week can lead to a pervasive,
a long-lasting impact on subjective wellbeing.
People report feeling happier, more meaning,
joy, even awe for their life experience,
simply in response to adding a gratitude practice.
The key thing is it has to be the right gratitude practice.
And we're going to talk about
what the right gratitude practice looks like
in just a little bit.
But there are additional benefits of a gratitude practice.
There are studies showing that a regular gratitude practice
can provide resilience to trauma in two ways.
It can provide a reframing and resilience
to prior traumatic experiences.
So buffering people against the negative
physiological effects and psychological effects
of earlier trauma, but also inoculating them in many ways
to any traumas that might arrive later in life.
So that's a powerful thing.
And today we will talk about
how that's actually accomplished.
It's actually accomplished by shifting the way
that the fear and defense networks
in the brain actually function.
We'll get right down into the details of that.
The other thing that a gratitude practice does
is it's been shown to benefit social relationships,
but not just for the relationship
in which you express gratitude, right?
So on the face of it, you might think,
okay, if I express gratitude for somebody over and over,
over and over, over and over,
then I'm going to feel better about that person.
And indeed that is one effect of a gratitude practice
that's called a prosocial or inter-social gratitude practice.
But there are now several studies,
recent studies in good journals,
pointing to the fact that a regular gratitude practice
can also enhance one's social relationships
across the board, in the workplace, at school,
with family, in romantic relationships,
and even one's relationship to themselves,
which is really what the subjective feelings
of wellbeing are.
So it's clear to me that an effective gratitude practice
has an outsized effect on many, many aspects
of mental and physical health.
And for those of you that are coming to this conversation
thinking gratitude practice,
oh, that's kind of wishy-washy or woo,
it's going to involve putting your hand on your heart
and feeling into all the amazing things
that you happen to have,
even when things are really terrible,
that's not where we're going at all.
And equally important is to understand
that the neurochemical, the anti-inflammatory,
and the neural circuit mechanisms
that gratitude can invoke are equally on par
with some of the effects of pharmacology,
of things like high-intensity interval training and exercise
and other things that we think of
as kind of more potent forms of self-intervention.
So if you are of the mindset that a gratitude practice
is kind of weak sauce,
buckle up because the data actually point to the fact
that a gratitude practice is a very, very potent way
in which you can steer your mental and physical health
in positive directions,
and that those effects are very long lasting.
Before we dive into the tools and mechanisms
and scientific studies around gratitude,
I'd like to just set the framework for the discussion.
Gratitude is what we call a prosocial behavior
or a prosocial mindset.
Now, you can be grateful for something
without it involving anybody else.
So the social part isn't meant to convey anything
about interpersonal relations, although it can.
And today we're going to talk a lot
about how interpersonal relations can be incorporated
into a gratitude practice in really powerful ways.
But prosocial behaviors are basically any behavior
or mode of thinking that allow us to be more effective
in interactions with other people, including ourselves.
Now, prosocial is not just a name
that we give these different tools
and practices and mindsets.
They're actually neural circuits in the brain
that are specifically wired
for prosocial thoughts and behaviors.
And these are distinctly different
from the circuits in the brain
that are involved in defensive behaviors.
So without getting into too much detail just yet,
we will later,
we have circuits in the brain
that are what we call a repetitive.
They are designed to bring us closer to things
and to bring us into closer relation
to the details of that sensory experience.
Now, that could be a delicious food that you're eating.
It could be interacting with a loved one.
It could be interacting with a friend
or anyone that you happen to like.
It could even be in your relation to yourself.
These circuits that we're calling prosocial circuits
light up in the brain in neuroimaging,
meaning the neurons are firing more actively,
more electrically, robustly,
sort of like turning up the volume on these neural circuits
in the brain.
And the neural circuits in the brain
that are associated with aversive or defensive behaviors,
things like backing up,
things like covering up the vital organs of the body,
things like a quaking of the voice,
all of the things that are associated
with defensive behaviors are actually antagonized,
meaning they are reduced
when the prosocial circuits are more active.
So the framework here that I'd like to set
is that we have this kind of seesaw
of neural circuits in the brain,
one set that are prosocial
and are designed to bring us closer to others,
including ourselves,
closer to certain sensory experiences, right?
Because a lot of prosocial behaviors
can also be geared towards things like pets or food
or anything that we find we want to be closer to
and want more of.
Whereas the defensive circuits involve areas of the brain,
yes, such as areas that are involved in fear,
but also areas of the brain and body
that are literally associated with freezing
or with backing up.
So the way to think about gratitude
is that falls under this category of prosocial behaviors,
which are designed to bring us closer
to different types of things
and to enhance the level of detail
that we extract from those experiences.
Now, the existence of these two neural circuits
that I've placed on this sort of a metaphorical seesaw,
if you will,
runs counter to a lot of the messaging
or the ideas that were put forth in the last century
about the psychology of happiness and gratitude
versus the psychology of depression and struggle
and concern about the future.
In fact, I'd like to read a quote from the great,
and we really should call him the great Sigmund Freud,
because despite having certain traits
that people criticize him of,
Freud was indeed a genius about many aspects of psychology.
But I just want to read you
Freud's stance on happiness,
and this invokes elements of gratitude as well,
and then you can gauge for yourself.
Quote, our possibilities of happiness
are already restricted by our constitution.
So he's saying that we're basically wired
to not have happiness easily.
Unhappiness is much less difficult to experience.
We are threatened with suffering from three directions,
one from our own body,
which is doomed to decay and dissolution
and which cannot even do without pain and anxiety
as warning signals.
Two, from the external world,
which may rage against us with overwhelming
and merciless forces of destruction.
And three, and finally, from our relations with others,
the suffering of which from this last source
is perhaps more painful to us than any other.
That's Sigmund Freud.
And not all of his writings were that pessimistic,
if you will.
What Freud is referring to there
are those defensive circuits.
And of course, he talked about psychological defensives.
And in full disclosure,
I am a huge fan of much of the psychological literature
and psychoanalysis of Sigmund Freud
and his descendants, Jung and others.
I think there are strong elements of truth there,
but it gives you a sense of the kind of mindset
of psychology early in the last century.
And then of course,
was the emergence of the positive psychology movement,
which was really about invoking the understanding
and eventually the elucidation of the neural circuits
for things like happiness and awe and affiliation
and things that we are calling prosocial circuits.
So the field of psychology has a dark and light,
if you will,
and the field of neuroscience has a dark and light.
You have these, what we call parallel pathways in the brain.
And we have parallel pathways in the mind
that set us up for feeling good about things
or for feeling less good about things.
I think what's really salient from the quote from Freud
is that what he's saying is our default
is to be concerned about the future,
to be wrapped in our defenses.
And to some extent that's true.
And the reason we can say that's true
is because most of us need a gratitude practice.
We need to do certain things in order to feel good
and to feel happy.
We actually have to put work into it.
It is quite possible that there's an asymmetry
in the way that these prosocial
versus defensive circuits are set up,
such that because defensive circuits
are designed to keep us safe,
psychologically and physically safe,
that they have more robustness
or they can actually drive our behavior more easily.
I'll give you an analogy in the system
that I'm most familiar with as a neuroscientist,
which is the visual system.
In the visual system, we have parallel pathways.
We have neurons in our eye that respond
when things in our environment get brighter.
Literally when the lights go up,
these neurons start firing like crazy.
And we have neurons in our eye that respond
when things get darker, when things start dimming
or go from white to black.
The circuits for detecting darkening
are much more robust and much more numerous
than are the circuits for brightness.
And that is probably related, probably,
to the fact that dark objects
or experiencing looming, meaning incoming objects
and being able to perceive them
is something that's vital to our survival.
Whereas being able to perceive the brightening of things
might be important to survival in certain contexts,
car lights coming at you at night or something of that sort,
but not as often in a kind of a evolutionary
or ethological context as the darkening of things.
So I think Freud's quote and the field of psychology
now point to the fact that indeed
we have the capacity for happiness
and we have the capacity for great worry and concern
and depression and unhappiness.
And the neural circuit literature also supports that.
The key thing for today's discussion
is that gratitude turns out to be
one of the most potent wedges
by which we can insert our thinking,
and as you also see, the physiology of our body,
between these two circuits
and give a little more levity, if you will,
to the side of the seesaw
that's associated with positive prosocial feelings.
And if you keep imagining this seesaw imagery,
what's really beautiful about gratitude practices
is that if they're performed repeatedly
and not even that often, but repeatedly,
then one can actually shift their neural circuits
such that the seesaw
that I'm calling prosocial versus defensive behaviors
can actually start to tilt.
And the little hinge, if you will,
on the seesaw in the middle
can be adjusted in a little tighter
when the side for gratitude and for wellbeing
and for feelings of happiness is a little bit higher.
What this means is that
whether or not Freud was right or wrong,
whether or not the neuroscientists in one camp
or another right or wrong,
we now know with certainty
that a regular gratitude practice
can shift the prosocial circuit
so that they dominate our physiology and our mindset
in ways that can enhance many, many aspects
of our physical and mental health by default.
So we don't always have to constantly be in practice
trying to be happy.
So the succinct way of saying all this is,
yes, indeed, we might be wired
or in such that we have a greater propensity
for unhappiness than happiness,
but gratitude practices,
provided they are the effective ones
and they are performed regularly,
can shift those circuits
such that we are happier on average
even when we are not performing those practices.
Now I'd like to talk about some of the neurochemistry
and neural circuits associated with gratitude
and prosocial behaviors.
Numerous times on this podcast,
I've talked about so-called neuromodulators.
Those of you that might've forgotten
or have never heard of neuromodulators before,
neuromodulators are chemicals that are released
in the brain and body
that change the activity of other neural circuits.
They make certain brain areas more likely to be active
and other brain areas less likely to be active.
These neuromodulators have names like dopamine,
serotonin, acetylcholine, epinephrine, and so on.
The main neuromodulators associated with gratitude
and prosocial behaviors tends to be serotonin.
Serotonin is released from a very small collection
of neurons in the brainstem called the RAFA,
R-A-P-H-E, the RAFA nucleus,
and a few other places in the brain.
And the RAFA neurons send these little wires
that we call axons out to numerous places in the brain
and they tend to increase the activity
of particular neural circuits that lend themselves
to more approach to particular types of experiences.
That makes total sense if you think about it,
have a chemical that under certain circumstances
is released in the brain
that triggers the activity of neural circuits
that makes the organism, you,
more likely to stay in an interaction with something
or even lean in and seek a more detailed interaction
with that person, place, or thing.
Beautiful work from a cognitive neuropsychologist.
His name is Antonio Damasio.
He's a world-class neuroscientist,
has been in the game a very long time,
has explored the so-called neural correlates of gratitude.
And two main brain areas are activated
by these serotonergic systems.
And when people experience something
that makes them feel gratitude,
even if it's shallow gratitude or deep,
and if it's all the way to deep gratitude,
they see activation of these particular brain circuits
I'll mention in a moment.
And the amount of activation scales
with how intensely the person experienced
the feeling of gratitude.
And those two areas have particular names.
You don't need to know the names,
but for those of you that want to know,
they are the anterior cingulate cortex
and the medial prefrontal cortex.
And of course, these brain areas are connected
to a number of other networks in the brain.
In fact, that's how they get you or others
to lean into certain experiences
because when these areas are active,
certain thought processes get invoked.
Those thought processes probably resemble something like,
hmm, I'd like to experience more of this,
or hmm, this feels really good.
And then they literally feed onto your muscles
via the neurons, making you happy to stay stationary
if you're experiencing something you like,
or to move closer to something
that you find attractive to you, literally.
So these are powerful circuits.
Of these two brain areas,
the one I'd like to focus on the most
is the medial prefrontal cortex.
Many of you have probably heard
of the medial prefrontal cortex
because this is the area of the brain
that is involved in planning and in deep thinking
and evaluation of different types of experiences,
past, present, or future.
It seems actually that pretty much every study
of a human anything seems to involve
the medial prefrontal cortex,
or at least one could get that impression
just by looking at scientific abstracts
and papers these days.
So I think it's worth us taking a step back
and asking what does the medial prefrontal cortex
really do, right?
How could this one piece of neural real estate
that we all have right behind our forehead,
how could that be involved in so many different things?
And the reason it can be involved
in so many different things,
and the reason it's especially important for gratitude
is that medial prefrontal cortex sets context, okay?
It sets context,
and it literally defines the meaning of your experience.
Now, this is not at all an abstract phenomenon.
I'm going to give a very physiological example of this,
and then we're going to translate it to gratitude,
but I really want everyone to understand
how is it that medial prefrontal cortex
sets the context of everything in your life?
Well, it does it the following way.
You have a number of circuits deeper in your brain
that simply create some sensations,
or they allow you, I should say,
to perceive certain sensations.
Let's use the example of cold exposure,
something that we'd sometimes talk about in this podcast
for other reasons.
If you were to deliberately place yourself
into an ice bath, it would be uncomfortable,
even if you're adapted to cold and so forth.
The discomfort is non-negotiable.
However, if you are doing it because you want to,
or because you have knowledge
that there are particular health benefits,
the medial prefrontal cortex can then control areas
of your deeper brain, like the hypothalamus,
to positively impact the neurochemicals
that are released into your system.
You'll still get a lot of adrenaline
by getting into the ice bath,
but the fact that you are doing this deliberately
and your knowledge that you are making the choice,
that it's you that's deciding
to put yourself through this discomfort,
has been shown to create a very different
and positive effect on things like dopamine,
on things like anti-inflammatory markers
in your immune system, et cetera,
compared to if someone pushes you into an ice bath,
or if you are doing it because someone insists
that you do it and you really, really don't want to.
So there's a very subtle distinction here.
It's just the distinction of motivation and desire
or lack of motivation and being forced into something.
And there are a number of other effects
of this that have been described.
In the episode with Robert Sapolsky
that I did earlier this last year,
he talked about a study in animals,
which has also been shown in humans.
If you take a mouse, for instance,
and it runs on a running wheel,
which mice really like to do,
there are many positive effects
on reducing blood pressure,
improvements in neurochemistry, et cetera, in that mouse.
However, if there's a mouse in the cage right next to it
that's trapped in the running wheel
and it has to run every time the other mouse runs
because the wheels are linked,
well, then the second mouse
that's forced to do the exact same running
experiences negative shifts in their overall health metrics.
Blood pressure goes up, stress hormones go up, et cetera,
because it's not actually making the choice.
Medial prefrontal cortex is the knob,
or the switch, rather, that can take one experience
and allow us to frame it
such that it creates positive health effects.
And the exact same experience framed
as something we don't want to do,
or that we are forced to do,
can create negative health effects.
Now, how exactly the neurons
in medial prefrontal cortex do that is rather complicated
and frankly, not completely understood,
but it's somehow able to adjust the activity
of other neural circuits that are purely reflexive.
As we say in neuroscience,
like really dumb neural circuits
that are just like switches and place a context onto it.
So gratitude is a mindset
that activates prefrontal cortex,
and in doing so sets the context of your experience
such that you can derive tremendous health benefits,
which leads us to the question,
what kind of gratitude practice
is going to accomplish this, right?
Because it is not simply the case that I could take a knife,
don't, please don't do this experiment,
and cut my hand and say, oh, you know,
I'm going to enjoy this.
I'm doing this because this is good for me
and it won't hurt.
Of course it'll hurt just like the ice bath is cold
no matter what, but I can't lie to myself, right?
If I have some knowledge that cutting myself is bad for me,
that's very hard to override.
And so the medial prefrontal cortex
has a tremendous capacity to set context,
and it does that beautifully with respect to gratitude,
but you can't simply lie to yourself.
You can't simply say, oh, well,
every experience is a learning experience,
or, you know, a terrible thing that happens,
oh, good, I'm just going to say good,
and that your body will react as if it's good for you.
That's a myth.
And frankly, it's a myth that's fairly pervasive
in the self-help and self-actualization literature.
We have the opportunity to reframe
and set context on our experiences,
but that requires a very specific set of practices.
We can't simply lie to ourselves
or quote unquote fake it until we make it.
Neural circuitry is very powerful and very plastic.
It can be modified, and it's very context dependent,
but it's not stupid.
And when you lie to yourself about whether or not
an experience is actually good for you or not,
your brain knows.
So what does an effective gratitude practice look like?
Well, let's examine what an ineffective,
what a poor gratitude practice looks like,
because therein lies some really important information,
including the fact that I,
and I think millions of other people out there
are doing it wrong.
Most gratitude practices that you see online
and that people talk about in various talks and so forth
involve something like writing down or reciting
or thinking about five or 10 or three or 20 things
that you're especially grateful for,
and then really trying to feel into some of those,
really try and think deeply about the emotions,
the sensations, the perceptions that are associated
with those particular people, places,
and things on your list.
Most studies actually point to the fact
that that style of gratitude practice
is not particularly effective in shifting
your neural circuitry, your neural chemistry,
or your somatic circuitry,
the circuits in your body,
because you literally have organs and neural circuits
that are connected, the circuits of your brain and body
toward enhanced activation of prefrontal cortex,
enhanced activation of these pro-social neural networks
that we were talking about earlier.
Now that may come as a surprise to many of you,
and certainly came as a surprise to me.
There is some evidence that if there's a shift
in so-called autonomic arousal
during these gratitude practices,
these ones that I'm calling ineffective,
that they can be made slightly more effective.
So what do I mean by a shift in autonomic arousal?
Well, very briefly, we have a aspect to our nervous system,
both within our brain and body
that we call the autonomic nervous system.
It's a little bit of a misnomer
because autonomic means automatic,
and in fact, we can take control
of the autonomic nervous system.
It has one branch, meaning one set of connections
and circuits that are associated with making us more alert,
the so-called sympathetic nervous system,
or I should say sympathetic arm
of the autonomic nervous system,
but that's really a mouthful.
It's really associated with enhanced alertness of any kind
for excitement or fear,
and it has nothing to do with sympathy.
It's just about enhanced alertness.
And then the other arm of the autonomic nervous system
is the so-called parasympathetic arm
of the autonomic nervous system,
but that's also a mouthful.
So let's just say it's the calming aspect
of the autonomic nervous system.
So it's associated with decreased heart rate,
decreased breathing rate, et cetera.
So we have these two aspects to our autonomic nervous system,
and it has been shown that if people are brought
into a state of heightened sympathetic tone,
meaning more alertness,
then the intensity of the emotions that they experience
in their gratitude practice is enhanced,
and the effectiveness of that gratitude practice
can be enhanced.
This is seen nowadays somewhat commonly
as having people, for instance,
cyclic hyperventilated breathing,
as we call it in my laboratory,
breathing that's very intense of the inhale,
exhale, inhale, exhale very deeply for 25 or 30 breaths.
Then people will sit in a meditative stance,
or they'll focus on their notepad and paper,
and they'll write out the things that they're grateful for,
and then they'll really try and feel into those things,
or they'll think about those things.
And it makes perfect sense
as to why enhancing autonomic arousal
toward more alertness would create more robust feelings
or more robust impact of these gratitude practices,
because in that state, you are more alert,
and therefore you are able to bring more detail,
more richness to the perception and the understanding
of what those things on your list happen to be.
But, and I should say
that there are numerous other approaches to this,
sort of self-help type stuff
and self-actualization seminars,
people will do things like cold baths,
or they'll do chanting,
or they'll have any number of different experiences,
all of which are mainly geared
towards increased autonomic arousal.
There are even practices out there using pharmacology
to create increased autonomic arousal
and then drop into gratitude.
Across the board,
those increase the potency of the gratitude practice
of listing things out on paper or in one's mind
or saying them out loud.
But somewhat surprisingly, at least to me,
that form of just expressing thanks,
expressing gratitude is not the most effective way
to shift these pro-social circuits in positive ways
for one's physiology and anatomy and psychology.
Turns out that the most potent form of gratitude practice
is not a gratitude practice where you give gratitude
or express gratitude,
but rather where you receive gratitude,
where you receive thanks.
And this to me was very surprising.
There are a number of studies about this now.
One in particular that I think is interesting
is called the prefrontal activation
while listening to a letter of gratitude
read aloud by a coworker face-to-face,
a NIRS study, N-I-R-S.
I'll explain what all this means.
You now know what the prefrontal activation part is.
This is activation of the prefrontal cortex.
The NIRS, N-I-R-S study, that's just a technical term.
It's a form of imaging brain activity.
It's non-invasive.
So it's kind of a skull cap.
It looks like a hoodie with a bunch of wires
coming out of it basically
that can measure neural activity
without having to remove any parts of the skull
or put a person into one of these tube-like fMRI machines,
which is very invasive.
It's also a wonderful tool
because it allows human subjects in the laboratory
to move around and to engage with one another.
So in this particular experiment,
what they did is they had coworkers write a letter
of gratitude of thanks to another coworker,
unbeknownst to the other coworker,
and then they sat down together
and then they imaged brain activity
as this letter was being read
and as the letter was being heard, received.
And it showed very robust effects
on these prefrontal networks
that pointed to the fact that receiving gratitude
is actually much more potent
in terms of the positive shifts that it can create
than giving gratitude.
So this raises a couple of important points.
First of all, if you are somebody
who is prone to write letters of gratitude,
ideally, I think it's requisite
that these be genuine letters of gratitude
or saying things that are genuine expressions of gratitude,
this could be by text or in-person or by phone,
you have within you a very potent form
of shifting somebody else's neurology.
Now, that's wonderful,
and I think there are many people like that out there,
but for many people who want to experience
the positive effects of gratitude,
it's probably not the most advantageous approach
to just sit around waiting,
hoping that someone's going to deliver
all these letters or words of gratitude.
How is it that you can create that sense
of receiving gratitude for yourself
and thereby derive the effects of gratitude
as outlined in this particular study?
And there we go back to the important work
of the great Antonio Damasio
who explored these neural correlates of gratitude
to define the areas of the brain
that are associated with pro-social behaviors
like the prefrontal cortex.
And what's really interesting about the work
that Damasio and colleagues did is,
first of all, they used functional
magnetic resonance imaging.
So this is a very high resolution approach
to exploring what areas of the brain are active
and it has very high, what we call temporal resolution,
meaning you can see things in time at very fine scales.
So a lot of mechanistic detail
can emerge from these sorts of studies.
What they did was interesting.
Rather than have people express gratitude,
they had the subjects go into the scanner,
so their brains are being imaged,
and they watched narratives, stories about other people
experiencing positive things in their life.
And in this case, these were powerful stories.
These were stories about survivors of genocide
so that's what they're watching.
The subjects were subjects
that were not survivors of genocide.
So they were watching these videotapes
of people that had survived genocide
and had people help them along the way
as part of their story of survival,
either psychological and obviously they survived
long enough to make the video or physical survival.
So within these stories,
there was conveyance of a lot of struggle.
These people talked about the horrible situations they were
but also small but highly significant features
of their history that had led
to their own feelings of gratitude.
So for instance, it says a woman at the image,
this is literally from the scientific paper,
somebody had been sick for weeks.
So the woman's describing how she'd been sick for weeks.
And then another prisoner who was a doctor
finds a particular medicine somehow,
it doesn't describe how, and literally saves her life.
Or an ally who was also in a stricken circumstance
gave this person a pair of glasses
when their eyesight started to falter.
So these sorts of stories.
Now, just hearing this in the context
of nothing but a scientific paper and discussion,
these probably aren't that impactful.
What's really important about this study
and is really important for all of us to know
is that these stories of other people receiving things
that were powerful for them in their life trajectory
is embedded in story.
And the human brain especially
is so oriented towards story.
We have neural circuits that like to link together
past, present, future, have different characters,
protagonists and antagonists.
From the time we're very young
until the time we're very old,
story is one of the major ways
that we organize information in the brain.
There does seem to be storytelling
and story listening circuits in the brain.
So what's important is not simply
that these people survive genocide,
that's obviously important and wonderful,
but it's not just that they were helped along the way,
it's that the description of their help
is embedded in a larger story.
So the human subject in this scientific study
is watching these powerful stories.
And the neural circuits associated with prosocial behaviors
and with gratitude become robustly active
when they start to feel some affiliation
with the person telling the story.
They start to feel some resonance.
We might call that empathy,
but it doesn't necessarily have to be empathy.
Empathy is a somewhat complicated thing to define
because it involves literally a setting aside
of one's own emotions and really focusing almost entirely
or experiencing almost entirely the emotions of another.
It could be sympathy, it could be empathy.
What we do know is that the stories themselves
were able to shift the physiology
of the subjects in this study
and activate these what we're calling gratitude circuitry
that involves the prefrontal cortex.
So if you think about the earlier study
that receiving gratitude is the most powerful way
to activate these circuits for gratitude,
the subjects in this study in many ways
are receiving a sense of gratitude,
but through the narrative of one of these other subjects,
which I find fascinating.
I would have thought a great gratitude practice
would be to sit down and list out
all the things you're grateful for.
That just seems so logical to me,
but it turns out that these neural circuits
don't work that way.
That to really activate these circuits for gratitude
and the serotonin and probably the oxytocin system as well
and its prefrontal networks,
one has to powerfully associate
with the idea of receiving help.
The subjects are associating or experiencing empathy
or sympathy for somebody else who received help.
In the other study we described a few minutes ago,
the person hearing the letter was receiving gratitude
and that would amplify the activity of these circuits.
And that takes us to a larger theme
of what are these prosocial circuits?
And an important concept to emerge from this
is one that's most often associated
with the autism literature, frankly,
which is this idea of theory of mind.
So just very briefly, theory of mind
is the ability to attribute
or to understand the experience of another
without actually experiencing the thing
that they're experiencing.
Again, it kind of sounds like empathy,
but this was actually a term
that's now been demonstrated
in the psychology and neuroscience
that's been linked to some very robust findings
associated with brain areas and so forth
that was looking at autistic kids and non-autistic kids.
The person largely responsible
for developing theory of mind is Simon Baron Cohen.
I believe he's either the brother or the cousin,
I can't recall which,
to the comedian Sasha Baron Cohen.
Simon Baron Cohen is a professor at Oxford University,
or at least he was the last time I checked.
And the theory of mind test
can be done on adults or on children.
And we can sort of do that experiment right now,
if you like, and you can think about how you would behave
if you were a subject in a theory of mind test.
Theory of mind test involves you or a child
or some other adults sitting down
and watching a video of a child going into a room
or a person going to a room,
opening up a desk or a dresser, a drawer, for instance,
or a desk drawer, and placing something in it,
like a pen or a toy, and then leaving.
And then another person walking into the room
and clearly looking for something in the room,
and one presumes it's the toy or the pen,
depending on the context.
People who have strong theory of mind
make the obvious conclusion
that the person looking around for the pen or the toy
is confused or they're perplexed.
They don't know where the toy is.
They're looking for the toy.
Someone who is fairly far to one side
of the autism or Asperger's spectrum
will simply focus on the location of the object,
on the location of the pen or the toy.
And this is especially true in children.
They will say, well, it's in the second drawer.
It's in the second drawer.
And they'll say, well, how does the person
who comes into the room feel?
And they'll say, well, it's in the drawer.
So they tend to focus on the specific factual elements
of the scenario rather than place their mind
into the mind of the other person, so-called theory of mind.
Now, that doesn't mean that people with autism
and Asperger's don't have empathy.
In some cases, they can.
It sort of depends on where they are in the spectrum
and so forth.
But theory of mind has very strong basis
in these prefrontal cortex neural circuits
that we were talking about because, as you now know,
the prefrontal cortex sets context
on what we see and experience.
And the theory of mind task that I just described
very briefly is a pure example of context setting, right?
It's not about just the factual elements
about the location of the objects.
It's about the context.
Someone is looking for something that someone else
put someplace that makes it such that that object
is hidden.
So basically, theory of mind is your ability
to put yourself into the mindset of another.
And in order to get activation of these gratitude circuits,
one needs to put themselves into the mindset of another
or to directly receive gratitude.
So let's just take a moment and start to think about
how we are going to build out
the ultimate gratitude practice,
meaning the most effective gratitude practice for us to do
because of all the many positive effects
that an effective gratitude practice can have
if it's the proper one.
It's very clear that receiving gratitude is powerful,
but it's also very clear that waiting around
to receive that gratitude is an impractical approach.
Now, there are methods that have been developed
by my colleague at Stanford, Kelly McGonigal,
and others that actually have developed things
for the workplace, for school, for coworkers and students
to write out particular worksheets related to
what they're thankful for from others and exchange them.
And so those are very useful practices.
I don't want to take anything away from the important work
that Kelly and others have done.
But in the absence of having other people
to do these practices with,
what we know for sure is that
there has to be a real experience
of somebody else's experience,
and that the best way to do that is story.
So in thinking about how to build out
an effective gratitude practice,
it's very worthwhile, I believe,
to find someone's narrative that's powerful for you.
In many ways to think about this is
it's got to be a story that inspires you
because of the, for lack of a better phrase,
the beauty of the human spirit
or the ability of humans to help other humans.
And I find this remarkable because what this really means
is that the circuits for gratitude
are such that we can exchange gratitude.
We can actually observe someone else getting help,
someone else giving help.
And that observation of our species
doing that for one another
allows us to experience the feeling of a genuine chemical
and neural circuit activation lift, if you will.
Very, very different than simply writing out the things
that you're thankful for, right?
And so how would you do this?
Well, people digest story in a number of different ways.
People watch movies, people listen to podcasts,
people read books.
There are a tremendous number of stories out there.
It's clear that an effective gratitude practice
has to be repeated from time to time.
So what I would not suggest is that we build a protocol
in which you're constantly foraging
for inspirational stories over and over again.
Social media and the internet are replete with those.
That's not going to be a very potent protocol or tool
because the most potent protocol or tool for gratitude
is going to be one that you repeat over and over again.
Rather, the most effective protocol or tool
is going to be either to think into,
and you could write this out if you like,
but think into when somebody was thankful
for something that you did
and really start to think about how you felt
in receiving that gratitude or, and or I should say,
imagining or thinking about deeply the emotional experience
of somebody else receiving help.
Now, what narrative you select
is going to be very dependent on you and your taste.
It's going to be very dependent on what resonates with you.
But again, I want to emphasize that the story
that you select does not have to have any semblance
to your own life experience.
It's just about what happens to move you.
And so the way that one could do this,
and actually I've started this practice for myself
on the basis of the learnings I've had
in the last few weeks around preparing for this episode,
is to find a story that's particularly meaningful for you
and then to just take some short notes, bullet point notes
about maybe list out, for instance,
on just a small sheet of paper or in your phone,
if that's your preference, just list out, for instance,
what the struggle was, what the help was,
and something about how that impacts you emotionally.
Okay, this is something just for you.
You don't have to share it with anybody.
That kind of shorthand list of bullet point notes
serves as your shorthand for getting into this mode
that we're calling gratitude and actually closely mimics
a lot of what was done in these various studies.
Because even though the studies I've talked about
up until now were really focused on what we call acute
imaging studies, where someone watched a story
or received gratitude while the experiment was done
and then that's it, one and done.
There are other studies looking at gratitude in this context
over many weeks, up to six weeks.
And what one observes is that there's so-called
neuroplasticity of these circuits.
Neuroplasticity is the brain and nervous system's ability
to change in response to experience.
And that these neural circuits start developing
a familiarity with the narrative.
So that, for instance, let's say you sit down
the first time you've found a story
that you find particularly compelling,
you've written down a few notes about what that story is,
just to remind you, and then you read those out
and you think into the richness of that experience,
that receiving of gratitude, or if you prefer,
you're doing the protocol where you're thinking about
when someone was deeply grateful or was genuinely grateful
to you, that you're thinking about that,
the neural circuits become activated more easily
with each subsequent repeat of the practice.
Now, this could be done literally for one minute
or two minutes or three minutes.
This is not an extensively long practice.
And that's another beauty of gratitude practices
is that they have these outsized positive effects
on so many aspects of our physiology,
but these are very short practices.
They're the kind of thing that you can do,
walk into your car, the kind of thing you can just sit down
for a minute and set a timer and do,
because they are really about changing
your state of mind and body.
And if you have an experience of receiving gratitude
or a story that's very potent for you,
it becomes a sort of shortcut into the gratitude network,
these pro-social networks,
meaning the activation of these circuits
becomes almost instantaneous.
And that's very different
than a lot of other practices out there.
I'm not aware of any meditation practices, for instance,
that you can do only a few times,
and then within a week or so,
you just have to do them for one minute,
you immediately drop into the kind of optimal state
that that meditation practice is designed to create.
There are some shorter meditation practices
that are very potent and very effective like that,
but gratitude and the circuits associated with it
appear to be especially plastic,
meaning especially prone to being able to be triggered
in the good sense of the word triggered,
just by simply reminding yourself
of this particular narrative.
Now there's another very clear and positive effect
of using this narrative or story-based approach
to a gratitude practice.
And that's what story does for our physiology.
Earlier in the episode,
I mentioned this really incredible study
in which listening to a story
coordinated the heart rate of different individuals
and literally changed the way that their heart was beating.
The title of this study
is conscious processing of narrative stimuli
synchronizes heart rate between individuals.
The first author is Perez, again, published in Cell Reports,
Cell Press Journal, excellent journal.
And it's a really elegant study.
They looked at instantaneous heart rate.
They use electrocardiogram to do that,
which is simply a way to look at heart beats
with very fine precision.
They also looked at the breathing of subjects
as they listened to these stories.
Some of you may know that breathing and heart rate
are actually linked to one another
in a really interesting way.
The simple way to put it is that when you inhale,
your heart rate speeds up a little bit.
And when you exhale, your heart rate slows down.
And this is because of the movement of the diaphragm
in your thoracic cavity.
And the physicians and medical types
call this respiratory sinus arrhythmia.
There's a mechanism there we could get into,
but I don't want to distract us from the main theme here.
So just remember when you inhale, your heart rate speeds up.
And when you exhale, your heart rate slows down.
They looked at breathing.
They looked at heart rate in different individuals.
And listening to a story produced very consistent gaps
between the heart rates of the people who are listening.
Different individuals in the study who were not located
in the same place when they listened to the story,
listening to the story in different times,
different days entirely,
had very similar heartbeat patterns listening to this story.
What this means for your gratitude practice
is that having a story that you can return to
over and over again, even if it's not the entire story,
you're just using the shorthand bullet point
version of your story,
will create a perceptible and real shift
in your heartbeat and in your breathing.
And actually that's been demonstrated over and over now
that an effective gratitude practice
is one that can rapidly shift,
not just the activation of these circuits in your brain
for pro-social behaviors,
but also activation of particular circuits in your heart
and in your lungs and the other organs of your body
such that you can get into a reproducible state
of gratitude each time.
So an important component here
is that there be some element of story.
Again, you don't have to listen to or read
or think about the entire story start to finish
in order to extract these benefits
and that it be the same story over and over.
And as a consequence, that's going to shift your physiology
into presumably a more relaxed state
because typically that's the one
that's associated with gratitude.
Although activation of these gratitude circuits
has also been shown to create sense of awe or sense of joy.
There are a few studies looking at and kind of parsing
the difference between gratitude and joy.
I was able to find a few studies about that,
but in general, the neural circuits that are activated
tend to overlap quite a lot
with those that create a sense of gratitude.
So we don't want to split hairs unnecessarily there.
The key thing is that you want to use the same story,
even if it's your own experience or somebody else's
and keep coming back to it over and over again.
That makes it a very potent tool
that you can get a tremendous amount of benefit from
with even as short as 60 seconds of practice.
Earlier, I talked about how you can't lie to yourself
and say, you know, I'm so grateful for this thing
that I actually hate.
And in a moment, I'm going to tell you
about some scientific data
that proves the statement I made is true
and that you can't just lie to yourself
and derive the benefits of a gratitude practice.
The data are also going to point to the fact
that if you are giving gratitude,
not just receiving it, but giving gratitude,
that too has to be genuine.
There's a really interesting study
published in Scientific Reports,
which is a nature research journal.
The title of it is, neural responses to intention
and benefit appraisal are critical
in distinguishing gratitude and joy.
It's a somewhat complicated study,
so I'm just going to hit on some of the high points.
But basically what they did
is they use functional magnetic resonance imaging.
So they could look at brain circuitry activation
with very high precision.
And they had people receiving money
in the context of this experiment.
And they had some knowledge as to whether or not
the money that they were receiving
was given to them wholeheartedly or reluctantly.
And there were a number of different variables in the study,
including how much money was given.
So in some cases it was very little,
in other cases it was modest,
in other cases it was a lot more.
And they also varied the extent
to which the giver of the money,
that they called the benefactor,
was doing it wholeheartedly
or seemed to be doing it somewhat reluctantly.
And they looked at whether or not the sense of gratitude
scaled with the amount of money received
and or the intention of the benefactor,
whether or not the person giving the money
was doing it wholeheartedly or reluctantly.
And what's remarkable is that
while the amount of money given was a strong component
in whether or not somebody felt
that they had received gratitude, which makes sense,
you know, the amount of money is some metric
of whether or not somebody feels thanked.
The stronger variable, the bigger impact,
came from whether or not the person giving the money
was giving it with a wholehearted intention
and not a reluctant intention.
And of course there was an interaction
where the best circumstance of course
is where the person received a lot of money
from somebody who wholeheartedly
wanted to give them a lot of money.
And they did every derivation of this,
but this is important.
This tells us many things that extend way beyond
gratitude practices,
which is that genuine thanks are what count, okay?
We could probably presume that,
but receiving genuine thanks is also a strong variable
in determining whether or not we experience real gratitude
or whether or not it's empty,
regardless of the size of a gift.
So this constrains our gratitude practices somewhat,
but I think in an interesting and important way,
you can't make this stuff up.
You can't tell yourself that an experience was great
or that, you know, I got a lot of money
and therefore it justified it,
even though, you know,
I think that they gave it to me reluctantly
or my boss hates me, but they gave me a raise.
That stuff stings for all the right reasons,
because there are circuits in our brain and body
that are oriented towards these pro-social interactions.
And in some sense, what we are looking for as a species,
what these circuits want, if you will,
is to receive things from people
that are giving them wholeheartedly.
And that tells us that if we are the giver,
that we better be giving wholeheartedly
or we are undermining the sense of gratitude
that someone is going to receive from us.
So we are gradually building up
the ultimate gratitude practice
based on the variety of scientific literature
that's out there.
And I know that many people are probably interested
in developing a gratitude practice
that has long lasting,
maybe even permanent positive effects
on their neural circuitry.
So with that in mind,
I want to turn our attention to a really interesting study.
It's entitled Effects of Gratitude Meditation
on Neural Network Functional Connectivity
and Brain-Heart Coupling.
And to make a long story short
and a lot simpler than that title,
repeated gratitude practice changes the way
that your brain circuits work.
And it also changes the way in which your heart
and your brain interact.
You're familiar with the fact
that your brain controls your heart
because you could be stressed about something
that's perceived with your brain
and then your heart rate will speed up.
You're probably also familiar with the fact
that if your heart rate speeds up
for some reason or no reason,
you're probably thinking,
well, what's making my heart rate speed up?
And that's because the brain and the heart
are reciprocally innervated, as we say.
They're talking to one another in both directions.
It's a two-way highway.
This study looked at changes in so-called
functional connectivity within the brain
and between the brain and the heart
in response to gratitude practices.
And as a control, they used what I think
is very interesting, a resentment intervention.
I think resentment is an apt control
and quite different than gratitude.
To make a long story short,
what they found is that a repeated gratitude practice
could change the resting state,
functional connectivity in emotion and motivation
related brain regions.
If I haven't mentioned a strong enough incentive
for doing a regular gratitude practice until now,
this is definitely the one to pay attention to.
Because what they found was a regular gratitude practice
could shift the functional connectivity of emotion pathways
in ways that made anxiety and fear circuits
less likely to be active
and circuits for feelings of wellbeing,
but also motivation to be much more active.
I find that remarkable and important
because a number of people
struggle with issues of motivation.
A lot of people who are highly motivated
also have issues with anxiety and fear.
And so this study really points to the fact
that it's a twofer.
If you have a good gratitude practice
and you repeat it regularly,
you reduce the fear anxiety circuits,
you increase the efficacy of the positive emotion,
feel good circuits and the circuits associated
with motivation and pursuits are actually enhanced as well.
So that's very strong incentive
to have a gratitude practice and one that you use regularly.
We'll talk about how regularly in just a moment.
I don't want to go into too many details of this study,
although we will put a reference to it if you like,
it includes a lot of FMRI data,
imaging data of different brain areas,
many, many tables and examples of matrices
of before and after gratitude, after resentment, et cetera,
you do indeed have circuits in your brain for resentment,
whether you like it or not, we all do.
And some people just,
those circuits are more robust than others.
But the remarkable thing is one can shift these circuits
in the direction that I think most people would like,
which is more sense of wellbeing and motivation
and less resentment and fear, literally.
And what's really cool about this study also
is that the interventions are only five minutes long.
It's incredible, five minutes long.
And so as we start to build out
our ideal gratitude practice,
we know that it has to have certain features.
First of all, it has to be grounded in a story,
probably a story that you've heard in its entirety
at least once, but then you can have a shorthand version,
the so-called bullet points that I talked about before
that allow you to drop into that story
or the emotional associations with that story.
So you don't have to listen to the whole story each time.
And that story should be one in which you are genuinely
being thanked for something and it made you feel good.
Or it could be a story about someone else
genuinely expressing thanks, okay?
Based on the description of the gratitude practices
that we talked about earlier.
Your gratitude practice can be very brief.
I mean, it can be as brief as one minute, 60 seconds
or five minutes, which still seems very brief to me.
Although in these studies,
they were getting these really major effects
just from five minutes of gratitude practice.
Some of these papers involve people doing some focusing
on their breathing and calming themselves
as they go into the gratitude practice,
but that's within the five-minute block.
So if you decide that you're going to do
a gratitude practice that involves first,
doing some calming breathing,
exhale-emphasized breathing, for instance,
or physiological sighs,
things I've talked about before on this podcast
that can help calm you down
because they have a lot of exhales,
which you now know slows your heart rate down,
and then doing your gratitude practice, that's fine.
It's actually not necessary,
but a lot of these studies used that.
I think once a narrative has been set,
you've heard the story and it has meaning for you,
or you have a recollection of a story
where you are genuinely thanked,
then I think just 60 seconds
or maybe 120 seconds should be sufficient.
Then the question becomes how often
to repeat this gratitude practice.
That's not exactly clear from the existing literature.
I can't point to any one study that says five times a week
or four times a week.
So I'm going to throw out a number,
which is three times a week,
and then people will ask,
well, when should I do that gratitude practice?
And I'll tell you what I tell most everybody
about most every practice with a few exceptions,
which is the best time of day to do this practice
is when you first wake up in the morning
or before you go to sleep at night or any time of day.
So we've talked about some of the neural circuitry changes
associated with a regular gratitude practice.
And I should mention that there's an additional
neural circuitry shift that occurs.
It relates to a structure that I mentioned
just briefly earlier, which is the so-called ACC
or anterior cingulate cortex.
This is an area of the brain that has several functions,
but more and more data are pointing to the fact
that the ACC is actually involved in empathy
and is involved in understanding the emotional states
of others in general,
even if it doesn't invoke a sense of empathy.
And there are several studies that point to the fact
that in humans who have a regular gratitude practice,
the ACC becomes more robustly engaged,
even with these very brief gratitude practices.
We actually have a project in our lab.
This is actually done in animal models
where animals observe other animals
experiencing certain emotional states.
And one of the brain areas that we've identified
as important for this,
it's kind of a primordial form of empathy
because we really don't know what these mice are thinking.
We work on humans.
In the case where we work on humans, of course,
we ask them and they tell us
what they think they're thinking.
With the mice, we ask them,
but they don't tell us much of anything interesting.
Instead, we measure a number of physiological signals.
But the important point is that the ACC,
the anterior cingulate cortex,
seems to be an important hub
for the generation and execution of empathy
as it relates to feelings and empathic behaviors,
altruistic behaviors of animals helping animals
and humans helping other humans.
We see this in the animal models, we see this in humans.
So if you want to be a more empathic person,
a gratitude practice is also going to be
very effective for that, it appears,
especially using this narrative type approach
where you are using someone else's narrative
of receiving gratitude
as a way to tap into your own sense of gratitude.
Thus far, we've mainly talked about the effects of gratitude
on neural circuit activation and changes
a little bit about some of the changes that are happening
in terms of the body, heart rate and breathing and so forth.
But we haven't talked a lot yet
about the changes in health metrics,
in things like inflammation or reductions in inflammation
and immunity and things of that sort.
So with that in mind, I'd like to describe the results
of a really interesting recent study
that was published in the journal
Brain Behavior and Immunity.
This was published 2021.
The title of the study is Exploring Neural Mechanisms
of the Health Benefits of Gratitude in Women,
a Randomized Control Trial.
The first author is Hazlitt.
And basically what this paper showed was that
women who had a regular gratitude practice
of the sort that we've been talking about up until now
showed reductions in amygdala activity,
a brain area associated with threat detection,
a intimate part of the fear network in the brain.
So reductions in amygdala activation
and large reductions in the production
of something called TNF alpha,
tumor necrosis factor alpha and IL-6, interleukin-6.
Now, if you happen to have listened to the episode
that I did on activating your immune system
and immune function, you heard about TNF alpha and IL-6.
TNF alpha and IL-6 are inflammatory cytokines.
These are chemicals that exist in your body
and that are released from cells
when there is damage or kind of a systemic stress
when your system is in duress.
And in the short term, they can be beneficial.
They can call in signals for wound healing
and repair of cells, et cetera.
But you don't want TNF alpha and IL-6 levels to be too high
and you don't want those levels to be up for too long.
And so this study is really nice
because they showed significant effects
in reducing TNF alpha and IL-6
in response to a gratitude practice.
And because they also observed reductions
in amygdala activation,
this area associated with threat detection and fear,
it's likely, and I should emphasize likely
because I don't know, that the direction of the effect
is that there are neural circuit changes
which in turn shift the degree
to which these inflammatory cytokines
are released in the body.
Although for all I know, it could be the other way too.
It could be that having a gratitude practice
shifts something about heart rate and breathing,
which in turn shifts or lowers the amount of TNF alpha
and IL-6 and that in turn reduces activation of the amygdala.
We don't really know the direction of the effect,
excuse me, but if I had to speculate,
I would speculate that it was a shift in neural circuitry
that led to a change in the circuits of the body.
And another interesting aspect of this study
is that the reductions in amygdala activation
and the reductions in TNF alpha and IL-6 were very rapid.
They occurred almost immediately
after the gratitude practice was completed.
And even though that study was performed
exclusively on female subjects,
based on the biology and circuitry of the amygdala
and the biology of TNF alpha and IL-6
performing this inflammatory role in both men and women,
I don't see any reason why the results of that study
wouldn't pertain to both men and women.
So what about the chemistry associated with gratitude?
Are there certain chemicals in our brain
or that we could enhance in our brain
that would enhance our gratitude practice?
Indeed, there are.
And earlier I mentioned the chemical, the neuromodulator,
serotonin, as having a powerful influence
on the activation of neural circuits
associated with prosocial behaviors and gratitude
and other sort of feel-good behaviors.
To make a long story short,
neuromodulators like dopamine and epinephrine
and norepinephrine tend to place us
into a state of exteroception,
meaning a state of observing things and focusing on things
outside the immediate reach of our body
and confines of our skin.
They tend to put us in pursuit
or in thinking about things out in the future
or out away from our physical body.
Whereas the neuromodulator serotonin
and some of the associated pathways
like oxytocin and other neurochemicals tend to,
I want to emphasize, tend to be associated
with states that are about contentment
with what we have within the confines of our body
and our immediate experience.
So they're not so much about pursuit,
but about gratitude and about appreciation
for what we already have.
I'd be remiss if I didn't therefore point out
that if one were to shift their chemistry
toward having higher levels of serotonin,
you would, by all logic,
experience heightened levels of gratitude.
And indeed, some people do this.
They will take compounds that increase serotonin.
There are a number of compounds out there.
As you know, I'm certainly not suggesting people do that.
A couple of the supplement-based
legal over-the-counter approaches to this
are things like 5-HTP, which is a precursor to serotonin.
Some people will take 5-HTP to try and enhance their sleep.
I'm not a fan of doing that personally.
I've talked about this in the sleep episodes,
but the state that we call sleep has a very complex
and important architecture as it relates to neurochemicals.
And by taking serotonin by supplement
or by stimulating serotonin release by supplement
with 5-HTP or with tryptophan,
which is an amino acid precursor to serotonin,
one can run into the problem
of disrupting the normal architecture of sleep cycles
throughout the night.
I experienced that as if I've taken 5-HTP or tryptophan,
I fall asleep very deeply,
but then I wake up three hours later
and I can't fall asleep at all.
And actually it sometimes even messes up my sleep
the subsequent night.
Some people are not so sensitive to 5-HTP and tryptophan
and they actually really like it.
So again, you have to talk to your doctor,
decide what's right for you,
you're responsible for your health, not me,
and you have to determine what works for you.
Everyone's slightly individual.
But one could imagine enhancing their amount of serotonin
in their brain and body by taking 5-HTP or tryptophan
before gratitude practice.
That seems a little bit extreme
given that the gratitude practice is only about a minute
to five minutes long on a regular basis.
But there may be instances in which you're really trying
to amplify these circuitry in the brain and body
that are associated with gratitude.
And therefore that might be something
that you want to explore.
There's a new compound that's out there,
a legal over-the-counter compound.
At least it's legal in the United States.
I don't know about overseas.
And that's a compound called KANA, K-A-N-N-A.
It's an interesting compound.
It goes by another name as well, which is,
and I'm going to mispronounce this and I apologize.
This is selecium tortosum.
Please see our timestamps if you want to see the spelling
of that, but I'll just call it KANA
by its other name for short.
It's an herb that is traditionally chewed
prior to stressing endeavors,
is how it's described on examine.com.
But I looked at some of the studies on this.
It's kind of interesting.
It very likely increases the amount of serotonin in the body
and pretty potently.
It is generally taken in dosages
of anywhere from 25 to 50 milligrams.
And it creates a kind of a pro-social gratitude enhancing,
or I should say gratitude circuitry,
pro-social neural circuitry enhancing effect
because of the ways that it interacts
with the serotonergic pathways of the brain.
So it also has another name.
It's sometimes called the zembrin, Z-E-M-B-R-I-N.
Again, I'm not suggesting that people run out
and take this stuff, but there is an emerging practice
of people using zembrin,
salicium tortosium, also called KANA, K-A-N-N-A,
in order to enhance these states
that are about comfort and pleasure
with what one has in their immediate sphere of experience.
And so one could imagine if it's safe for you
and right for you and legal where you live,
in enhancing serotonin by taking KANA
and then doing your gratitude practice.
What's the logic behind that?
Well, oftentimes we hear about supplements
and pharmacology for quote unquote,
increasing plasticity or opening plasticity.
If I had a dollar for every time someone said,
I hear that such and such opens plasticity.
Well, indeed there are molecules associated
with the thing that we call neuroplasticity,
but neuroplasticity is not an event.
It's a process, meaning it has many, many steps.
It occurs during wakefulness.
It's consolidated during sleep and so forth.
So taking a substance that increases a neurochemical
in your brain will likely,
provided it's the right substance
and it's the right practice,
will likely enhance the amplitude
or the intensity of that practice
and make it a more potent form of inducing neuroplasticity,
meaning it will create longer lasting
or more robust brain changes
than if one hadn't increased their chemistry
in this way, this way of taking something.
But that doesn't necessarily mean
that you couldn't get to the very same place without it
by simply doing a slightly longer gratitude practice
or putting a little bit more mental effort into it.
That said, I think the future of neuroplasticity
really resides in not just one approach,
not just neurochemistry and taking substances
to increase neuroplasticity,
not just behavioral practices
to try and increase neuroplasticity,
not just brain machine interfaces
or devices to increase neuroplasticity,
but rather the convergence of multiple tools.
So you could imagine enhancing serotonergic transmission,
as we say, in the brain using something like Kana
combined with a gratitude practice
in the not too distant future.
This will probably also be combined
with some sort of noninvasive device
to stimulate the prefrontal cortex at the same time.
Please don't do that recreationally.
Those devices are for clinical use only currently.
But I think you start to get the idea.
So for those of you that are a little bit more exploratory
and you want to go and do some reading on this,
I thought you might find Kana interesting.
I certainly did.
There are a number of studies that will pop up on PubMed.
I recommend using examine.com as your jumping off point.
There are some decent studies that they describe
in their so-called human effect matrix.
So those are studies done on humans.
And the main effects that have been documented
in the scientific literature are minor
but significant increases in cognition, executive function.
Executive function is something that's also associated
with prefrontal cortex and reductions in anxiety.
And that seems to be a common theme that we're seeing
again and again.
You saw this in the study, the trial where we saw reductions
in TNF alpha and reductions in amygdala activation.
So which would ostensibly lead to reductions in anxiety.
You're seeing increases in activity and brain networks
that are associated with feelings of wellbeing.
So again, back to that kind of push-pull
of defensive anxiety and fear-like circuitry in the brain
being antagonistic, as we say,
to the circuits that are associated with pro-social,
feeling good, receiving good feelings type circuitry
and events in life.
So as you now know, there is a lot of science
about how gratitude can positively impact neural circuits
in the brain, anti-inflammatory markers in the body,
brain, heart, breathing coordination,
and on and on and on.
I'd like to just highlight the key elements
of the most effective, at least to my knowledge,
gratitude practice.
And when I say the most effective,
what I'm doing is I'm gleaning from the scientific studies
I was able to find and combining the various findings
of those studies into what I think is a very practical
and what should certainly be a very effective
gratitude practice for all the positive effects
that we described.
First of all, that gratitude practice has to be grounded
in a narrative, meaning a story.
You don't have to recite or hear that story
every single time you do the gratitude practice,
but you have to know what that story was
and what the gratitude practice references back to.
Second of all, that story can be one
of you receiving genuine thanks.
And the key elements there are that you are the one
receiving the thanks, the gratitude,
and that it's being given to you genuinely, wholeheartedly.
Or it can be a story of you observing someone else
receiving thanks or expressing thanks.
And that has to be a genuine interaction as well,
both between the giver and the receiver.
So those are the first three elements.
What I recommend would be after you've established
the story that you want to use for your gratitude practice,
that you write down three or four simple bullet points
that can serve as salient reminders of that story for you.
It will serve as kind of a cue for that story
without having to listen to or talk out the entire story.
I would recommend writing down something about the state
that you or the other person were in
before they received the gratitude,
the state that you were in or that the person was in
after they received the gratitude,
and any other elements that lend
some sort of emotional weight or tone to the story.
This could be three pages of text if you like,
or it could just be a couple of bullet points.
I don't think it really matters.
The important thing is that it's embedded in your memory
and that it's really associated
with this genuine exchange of thanks
and the receival of thanks.
I think those are the key elements.
And then it's very simple.
The entire practice involves reading off these bullet points
as a cue to your nervous system of the sense of gratitude.
And then for about one minute,
which is a trivial amount of time
if you really think about it, or maybe two minutes,
or if you're really ambitious up to five minutes
of just really feeling into that genuine experience
of having received gratitude
or observed someone else receiving gratitude.
And then in terms of frequency,
I think a good rule of thumb would be to do that
about three times a week.
And the time of day doesn't really matter.
I can't see why there would be
any so-called circadian effects of this.
I know some people like to do a gratitude practice
before they go to sleep at night.
I don't see any problem with doing this
before you go to sleep at night.
I also don't see any problem with you doing this
on your lunch break or mid-morning
or first thing in the morning.
I can't see any logic for placing it
any one time of day and not another.
So I think the most important thing
is that you do it at least three times a week.
And as mentioned before, it's very, very brief.
So there are very few barriers to entry for doing this.
So if we just take a step back from this protocol
and compare it to what's typically out there
in the literature, which is,
make a list of all the things you're thankful for,
recite in your mind all the things you're thankful for,
count your blessings.
So I think everybody should be
counting their blessings all the time.
There's always something to be thankful for.
But in terms of a scientifically grounded
gratitude practice that is also scientifically demonstrated
to shift your physiology at the level of your immune system
and your neural circuitry, reducing anxiety,
increasing motivation, all these wonderful things
that so many of us are chasing all the time as goals,
I think a gratitude practice reveals itself
to be an immensely powerful tool for any and all of us
to use, and that should come as no surprise
because these pro-social circuits,
these circuits for gratitude are not a recent phenomenon.
Discussions about gratitude date back hundreds,
if not thousands of years.
What we've done today is to take the modern science
right up until 2021 and to really distill from that
the neuroimaging data, the neurochemistry,
the various aspects of brain-body connectivity,
look at the protocols, take various subject groups,
some were done in women, some were done
in between two individuals, some were done
with brain imaging, all the various changes on a theme
that allow us to point to a simple
but very effective protocol that certainly we could all use
around Thanksgiving, but Thanksgiving is just but one day
throughout the entire year, of course.
I personally have been using a gratitude protocol
for the last several years, but that protocol was based
on my ignorance really about the scientific literature
and was mainly based on what I'd heard out there
on the internet, which is that I should list out
or think about or verbally recite the things
that I'm grateful for.
The sort of protocol that we arrived at today
based on the scientific literature
is distinctly different from that.
And as a consequence, I've started to script out
a protocol identical to the one I just described,
and I intend to use that going forward.
If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
That's a terrific zero cost way to support us.
In addition, please subscribe to us on Apple and Spotify.
And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us a comment
and up to a five-star review.
Also, please check out our sponsors mentioned
at the beginning of this episode.
That's the best way to support this podcast.
In addition, we have a Patreon,
it's patreon.com slash Andrew Huberman,
and there you can support this podcast
at any level that you like.
During today's episode and in many previous episodes,
I mentioned supplements.
Supplements aren't for everybody,
but if you are going to use supplements,
it's imperative that those supplements
be of the very highest quality.
For that reason, we partnered with Thorne,
that's T-H-O-R-I-N-E, because Thorne supplements
have the highest levels of stringency
in terms of the quality of the ingredients they include
and the precision of the amounts of the ingredients
they include in their products.
They partnered with every major sports team
as well as the Mayo Clinic,
so we're delighted to be partnered with them as well.
If you want to see the supplements that I take,
you can go to thorne.com slash the letter U slash Huberman,
and there you can see all the supplements that I take,
and you can get 20% off any of those supplements,
or if you navigate into the site through that portal,
thorne.com slash U slash Huberman,
you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements
that Thorne makes.
Thank you for your time and attention today,
learning about the science of gratitude,
and last, but certainly not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
I'll see you in the next one.